and pressure and so forth.
New hires comes in the winter and spring weeks?
The paperwork, yes.
That's what I mean.
Yes.
The physical people show up here usually about the first week in August, and we will have our new faculty orientation
August 20th and 21st this year.
Describe the dean of faculty's task there.
Yes.
The first year I was here, I pretty much sat back and watched the spectacle because it was so close to time for it to happen, you know.
And Ann has done this for years and she was very well organized.
But I have continued to tinker with it from year to year because whatever we do, it never quite seems perfect, you know?
Pretty good, but gee, if only we'd had this session before that session instead of after or something like that.
And so each year, it will vary a little bit.
This year,
We are reducing from two and a half days to two days because I know how busy the new people are, and I could see the drift off, and I felt like if we could hold them for two full days, that ought to be enough.
But boy, it's hard to get in what we need to get in.
About what percentage of the new faculty actually participate in these?
Oh, I think three quarters of them.
Yeah, we have pretty darn good attendance.
And the ones who show up usually seem very glad.
And we often hear people say, oh, I didn't want to do this.
I made myself do it, and then I was glad I did it.
So I think it's a very worthwhile thing to do.
The dean of faculties is also charged with
and development of academic administrators, development experiences.
And I think that's what I feel I've done least well at.
And I'm still searching for a good venue.
Which, what level of academic administration?
Department heads, associate deans, deans, and sometimes somebody like the new director of the press will join in, and very appropriately so, and we're glad.
But mostly department heads, associate deans, and deans.
Last year, we went away from a format of two full days of a parade of talking heads.
which gets kind of deadly dull, right?
Even if the talking heads individually are very bright and engaging, it gets dull.
We went to a seminar format, a topical seminar format, inviting all of the academic administrators and not just the new ones.
And that makes for good conversations, the experienced people talking to the less experienced people, et cetera, et cetera.
We still have a problem of attendance.
These are very busy people.
And not as many attend as I think should attend.
But in going to the seminar series, I think we missed something.
I think the new people need a jump start.
And this fall, we are going to have a one-day toolkit of essentials for the new ones, deliberately keeping to a minimal number of topics to try to avoid that.
parade through effect.
And we are going to have just three topics.
We are going to have someone from the general counsel's office to come talk about essential legal concepts that you need a firm grip on.
I'm going to have someone from what used to be the university auditing office, which is now the management and, I forget what Charlie Clark's office is now called, but management advising office, let's call it that for the moment, to talk about good fiscal management and how to have such a good fiscal operation that you won't need to be audited.
Okay?
That's the morning and in the afternoon.
I'm going to march through the university policies that pertain to faculty members.
So I want these new people to actually look at those and not to be discovering later, oh, I was supposed to do this and so.
Oh, there's a grievance committee.
I didn't know that, et cetera.
So we're going to try to do the jump start and then have our seminar series.
And if we can't make it appealing enough for people to attend, then we need to make it more appealing.
Let me, as an editorial note, add what we first began to attempt as new faculty orientation when I was dean of faculties.
When Dr. Williams told me I would be responsible for it, I complained about how it was done when I was a new faculty member my first year in the fall of 59.
We had what I considered like boot camp lectures.
by President Rutter telling us what we would and would not do.
The Corps commander came and directed us around like we were a bunch of fish in the Corps and so forth.
And pretty soon, Dr. Williams said, well, if you think you know what it ought to be, you bring me a plan.
So what we came up with for that period was a one day in which we asked both husband and wife, whether they were both faculty members or not, but husband and wife to come dressed casually and let's begin at 8.30 and we would welcome them
introduce them a little bit to Aggie traditions, but much of the day we would spend in visiting some of the interesting and sometimes remote parts of the campus.
Go to veterinary surgery, go to the top of the meteorology building, go to the inner parts of the library, to the MSC, to the Rudder Auditorium.
And then in that, at about 4 o'clock,
Then they were to come back at night to a formal dinner, and Dr. Williams, who was a superb speaker, would then speak that evening about this institution and what he dreamed it would be.
I, as the master of ceremonies, would always end up saying, our hope, ladies and gentlemen, is that this day will help
to cause you on the way home from this day of activity to turn to each other and say, you know,
I'm real glad that we're here.
That's a wonderful purpose.
Because I said, if we can have you feeling positive about this institution on your first day, then there is a good chance of it being a happy, happy routine.
Well, I may quote you at this year's orientation.
I like that.
I'd be happy to.
And if I can ever help, please let me know.
Let's see.
Have you ever been sued?
No.
Has anyone accused you informally of not giving them fair treatment as dean of faculties?
I don't think so.
Not everybody's always happy, of course.
When I took this job, people would always mention the lawsuit idea and would say, don't ask yourself whether you'll be sued only when, because you will be.
Haven't been yet.
To whom do you turn for legal advice?
Usually Dena Wallace in the Office of General Counsel.
She has the title Associate General Counsel.
I used always to call Scott Kelly.
Scott Kelly... Was he on the... And he's still there.
At the Counsel's Office?
Oh, yes.
But Scott, I don't know.
I just think he's more and more involved in system-level things, and Dena is the one who's primarily associated with the university.
In fact, you are responsible for about how many faculty?
About 2,200.
And of those, about how many are tenure-track?
1,710 as of last fall.
Okay.
And compared to other institutions of this size and of this sort, are our numbers comparatively typical?
Our numbers are much smaller than they should be for an institution of the quality we are.
Number of faculty?
Our number of faculty in proportion to the number of students.
We are under-facultied for our size of student body.
And that was studied very carefully in the Vision 2020 project, and it's clearly demonstrated.
Boy, but that's a hard one to change.
As you have worked with the provost, what are, does he have any pet peeves?
Does he have any
Does he have any things you know that he's deeply concerned about?
Pet peeves and no-no's, I think the one way in which he probably gets irritated with me, though he doesn't show it much at all, I have to look closely, is that my email messages and memos are too long.
He wishes I were more terse.
I think that Ron is very interested in
really quality work and he wants us to find a way to bring the best quality faculty and to keep the best quality faculty and he doesn't want us to get tangled up in red tape.
ever to the point that it prevents us from doing that.
And, of course, I share those values.
And if he had to give a priority to teaching research or service, where would it fall?
I will say it's a tribute to him that I have trouble answering that.
There's not one that's easily an obvious.
You think it's valid.
Yeah, it would certainly be teaching or research, but between those two, I'm stymied.
In your years, do you remember any midnight calls or weekend calls of emergencies?
Those, no, not really.
Those usually go to the college dean, not to the dean of faculties.
And, in fact, only day before yesterday I had a call from a department who had, where the associate head had gotten an emergency call on Sunday over the weekend.
Well, he didn't call and fill me in on it until Monday because he didn't need to.
College person took care of it.
I remember very early in my service placing a night call to the provost when it came
to my awareness, which I should have been aware sooner, that the Women Faculty Network reception had been scheduled for Rosh Hashanah.
And it wasn't until about three days before that until we realized what a bad thing we had done.
And we had a call from someone saying, you need to cancel this.
And at that point, we decided it was too close, that we just couldn't, that more people would be discomfited that way.
But I don't like that answer because the minority persons in a group are the ones who most need protection for their rights.
And we've tried to be very, very careful about this since then.
So you held it on Rosh Hashanah, but was there an apology at the event?
I don't remember that there was out loud, but I conferred with the provost about whether we should cancel or not.
It may not even have been three days ahead.
It may have been like two days ahead.
And it was not the main day of Rosh Hashanah.
You know, more orthodox observers of the faith observe a longer period, and it was in this extended
period.
We were not so inept as to have scheduled it on the primary day, but I wished that we had not on one of the secondary days.
All right, now that causes me to jump to this question.
And I'll preface it with a Fred McClure statement.
One day I was talking to Fred, you know, Fred, why do we have difficulty recruiting black faculty?
He said, because there is not a clear black community in this town with black professionals.
What are Texas A&M's major obstacles in recruiting minority, international, people of other religious backgrounds?
What are our handicaps there?
Well, certainly Fred was right that the community
makes a difference.
It is a strength of a community that we are very family oriented in this community.
That's wonderful for families, but that makes it hard for single faculty.
So almost anything will have
It's reverse.
Homogeneity in a community is probably great if you are strongly group identified and you're part of the majority.
But for anyone who's different, it's not.
And also, homogeneity in an academic community doesn't serve intellectual purposes well.
We function better in our learning, in our teaching,
in our studying, in our investigating, when we have a great variety of voices.
A great variety of voices usually come to you in a great variety of human packages.
And so we need that.
What's holding us back?
Yes, the community, which has historically been an overwhelmingly white community in its more affluent and professional levels.
And one would hope to change that.
in the family orientation and the varieties of leisure time activities here.
Those hold us back.
I think we have sometimes in our good intentions not listened enough to our minority faculty members themselves and I have
The past two summers had focus group meetings with all of our African American faculty and all our Hispanic faculty who care to attend.
And we've talked as frankly and openly as people can talk in a group situation.
Good turnouts?
Good turnouts.
Better last summer than this summer.
I think people were surprised and it was the first time.
smaller numbers this summer, but I think we have often tried to figure out how we could be more effective in recruitment and retention of minorities without asking the minority faculty members themselves.
What about Asian faculty?
Do they, how do they feel here?
Do you know?
I have not had the group discussions as opposed to individual discussions with Asian faculty that I've had with African American and Hispanic.
I think within the university community itself, our Asian faculty usually feel very comfortable.
That's what I thought.
Many are very conspicuously successful, and we are so fortunate and happy that they are here.
Out in the community, I don't know.
I think Asian faculty usually do well.
Asian graduate students, I'm not sure.
I worry about them a little bit.
I have heard rumors of hostile statements and actions that bother me a lot.
Goofy things that the dean of faculty has been confronted with.
Goofy things.
Silly.
Goofy.
I know you're not going to believe this, but... Oh, goodness.
I should have been thinking of funny things.
No.
More sad things.
Such as?
People's illnesses.
People's troubles in their lives.
That makes this job hard.
If you care about people, it makes them hard, it makes it hard.
We had a faculty member, I won't say in what part of the university, who, I'm not sure how open to be, you may want to edit this out, who had prostate cancer.
and who was wetting his pants in front of his classroom, and students were laughing at him.
And you see how that gets me now.
And he, well, yeah, those sad stories come to mind, and I wish that I had the funny ones more in my mind.
That would make better oral history.
Right now, one that I remember, a goofy one, this is another editorial note.
Back when we were reviewing, I would meet with
prospective faculty and spend about a half hour trying to describe Texas A&M, what it actually is, as honestly as I could describe it, and what we hoped it was going to be.
As I looked at this man's resume, I noticed that he had done his PhD at the University of Virginia.
And so when he came in, I said something about what a pleasure it was to do research at the Alderman Library.
And that didn't register with him.
Oh.
And so I then referred to the grounds, and that didn't either.
I then talked about the lawn and the East Range and the West Range, and that didn't either.
So I then made up the names of three of my, quote, friends in the English department at the University of Virginia, and he said he knew them very, very well.
Oh, my word, Haskell.
So after he left, I called the Department of English and told them that it was not my job to review the capability of anyone.
That was their job.
But this is what had happened, that something was wrong.
They needed to check.
They called the University of Virginia.
This man had never been heard of there.
that he had submitted some phony, a phony resume.
Did you ever encounter anything like that?
Oh, my word, no.
That's absolutely amazing.
I did encounter once an attempted hire in one of our departments where I was not convinced this was the quality of person we ought to be hiring.
And it's only with fear and trembling that I call a dean or department head and say that because they will be very quick to, well, and rightly so, to perceive interference.
But this time I did kind of call and shyly indicate that.
And the department head expressed a great desire to discuss it with me.
And he arrived at my door bearing two big file boxes of applications and proceeded to sort of go through them one at a time.
And he demonstrated to me by the weight of paper that they had indeed hired the best person.
Have you felt consistently positive about the search processes that the departments have used to recruit faculty?
No.
Mostly positive, yes.
But there have been a couple of times that I have heard of things being said in search committee meetings that if true were not appropriate.
And fortunately, in those cases, I've always had a dean or an associate dean that I knew well enough that I could call and say,
This is what has come to me, and I hope it's not true, and it probably isn't true, but you need to know it, and you need to look into it.
As A&M is recruiting faculty in today's real world, what are our strengths and our weaknesses in trying to recruit outstanding faculty?
Our strengths are the wonderful faculty that we have here now, and people know that.
People want to come work.
with our people.
And I can give you examples of that.
Our weaknesses are, and this statement would not be well received by everybody, that people are still suspicious that we are extremely military in our nature.
Women are very suspicious that we are still extremely male dominated.
I spoke with a woman, a candidate not long back, who said to me, when people at the national meeting in my field heard that I was applying to Texas A&M, they took me aside and said, you do not want to go there.
Now I want you to tell me why they were wrong.
She did not accept our offer, by the way, but at least she thought about it carefully.
And she did get an offer.
In general, is Texas A&M seen as a school that is moving forward?
Yes, I do think that that's true, and we are seen as a school that is well-funded compared to many institutions.
Now, we always know that we have less money than we have ideas and things we want to do, but it would be pretty bad if it were the other way around, wouldn't it?
What, with what other separate land-grant colleges would you think we should most
appropriately compared as our peers?
Michigan State is, usually we would be considered not quite as good an institution as Michigan State, but that's not necessarily so, and we ought to be winning that comparison.
North Carolina State, we ought to be winning that comparison, and sometimes we are.
And after that, we're clearly better than anybody else.
Yeah, I'm groping for where I'd go next.
Now, in Vision 2020, our goal is to be one of the top ten publics.
That's right.
Reckon we can do that?
I don't know.
It's going to be touch and go, because the other institutions out there, not only the ones that are, you'd say, are top 10 publics now, but the ones that are in the next 10.
They're also moving.
And who knows who's going to have the good fortune and the good wisdom and the resources and everything it takes to be in that select group in 2020.
But the effort to be there is itself beneficial.
Whatever.
You see that as an appropriate goal.
Absolutely, I do.
And possibly a doable one.
In the years that you've been here, both as dean of faculties and earlier, how has this institution changed, for better or for worse?
The liberal arts are stronger.
There is more of a consensus that we need the fine arts.
There's certainly not a consensus yet that we can build them effectively in the short term because the huge resource demands.
But certainly there's a consensus that we need the arts.
And when I came here, I do not think there was.
I think the position of women in the faculty has improved, although still there's some grading now and then.
And women are still suspicious and not always feeling well-treated.
But on the whole, I think we're doing better.
in that respect.
We have greatly increased our programs.
That is, new programs have come online.
We have proven to be better at inventing new programs than we are at discontinuing any old programs.
And we need to watch for both of them.
I bet we're not going to go on to another tape.
I bet we need to be over it.
We've got a little bit more.
Just a little bit.
Are there any things that we ought to review about termination, discontinuing?
Of programs?
Mm-hmm.
I think we ought to be looking at degree production and looking at it real hard.
And that doesn't necessarily mean that if you only produce five degrees a year in something that it's not worth having.
It doesn't necessarily mean that.
But we are stewards for the people of Texas, and we need to be looking at that.
Things do change.
Do we give enough attention to that part of the world that's south of us?
As an institution?
To the valley?
No, well, I'm talking about all of America, south and river.
Oh, you're really looking.
Yeah.
Do we give enough attention to that?
Oh, I, don't get me started on that.
I think one of the things that I would most love to see happen at this institution, all right, is when we have our capital campaign, that we would get
Two or three, I mean, I want to be modest in my goals, chairs in border studies, border studies being the emerging or recently emerged name.
This institution has lots of strength in border studies, but it's scattered.
And we could pull it together.
We could be.
a leader in that.
Why aren't we?
I want to see that.
So that's, I have been talking up, and I just think there are multiple benefits to that.
Now, coming out of a liberal arts background, the whole Latin America, Iberian Peninsula debate in the modern languages is a rather more specialized debate than you were talking about, I think.
But it's, it's,
indicative of that whole, that our focus perhaps has been excessively Eurocentric for a long time, and it needs a little more balance, shall we say.
As dean of faculties, you had little, if any, outside interference from a
from a former student, a legislator?
Absolutely.
A board member?
Nobody ever called and tried to tell you to do this or that?
No.
I've certainly seen that at times
people with connections call the president's office because their neighbor's offspring wasn't satisfied with a professor or something, and those complaints come in.
But have people tried to lean on me to do something?
No, never.
And particularly regarding hires or promotions or anything?
Never.
Absolutely not.
Right.
I never had that.
Never had that.